README.md, before:

# Car Price Prediction

Predict the selling price of used cars using regression models. This project explores a public Kaggle dataset containing features such as car brand, year, mileage, fuel type, transmission type, and more. The goal is to build an accurate predictive model that helps estimate fair market value.

## Dataset

**Source:** [Car Price Prediction Dataset - Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/bhavikjikadara/car-price-prediction-dataset)  
Contains various attributes:
- Car_Name
- Year
- Selling_Price
- Present_Price
- Kms_Driven
- Fuel_Type
- Transmission
- Owner

## Codebase Structure

```
Car-Price-Prediction-Project/
├─ README.md
├─ .gitignore
├─ .env.example
├─ requirements.txt        # core deps shared across projects
├─ Makefile                # convenience targets (see below)
├─ configs/
│  ├─ dataset.yaml         # paths, target, splits, modality
│  ├─ model.yaml           # model family & hyperparams
│  ├─ train.yaml           # epochs, batch_size, class_weights, seed
│  └─ eval.yaml            # metrics to compute/report
├─ data/
│  ├─ raw/                 # original data (not tracked by git)
│  ├─ interim/             # cleaned/standardized (e.g., tokenized text)
│  └─ processed/           # train/val/test ready for modeling
├─ models/
│  ├─ artifacts/           # .joblib / .pt / .h5 files
│  ├─ metrics/             # JSON/CSV metric logs per run
│  └─ version.txt          # pointer to "best" model
├─ notebooks/
│  ├─ 01_eda.ipynb
│  ├─ 02_baseline.ipynb
│  └─ 03_experiments.ipynb
├─ reports/
│  ├─ figures/             # plots saved by EDA/eval
│  └─ model_card.md        # short, human-readable summary
├─ scripts/
│  ├─ download_data.sh     # optional data fetcher
│  ├─ run_train.sh
│  └─ run_eval.sh
├─ src/
│  ├─ __init__.py
│  ├─ cli.py               # `python -m src.cli <cmd> --config ...`
│  ├─ utils/
│  │  ├─ io.py             # load/save, path helpers
│  │  ├─ logging.py        # run id, console/file logs
│  │  └─ metrics.py        # RMSE/MAE/ROC AUC/F1, etc.
│  ├─ data/
│  │  ├─ load.py           # reads raw -> dataframe/paths
│  │  ├─ split.py          # stratified/temporal splits
│  │  └─ preprocess.py     # dispatches by modality
│  ├─ features/
│  │  └─ tabular.py        # scaling, OHE/target enc, imputation
│  ├─ models/
│  │  └─ tabular.py        # sklearn pipelines (LR/RF/XGB/LGBM)
│  ├─ training/
│  │  ├─ train.py          # fit loop; saves model+metrics
│  │  └─ evaluate.py       # loads model; computes metrics & plots
│  └─ inference/
│     └─ predict.py        # batch/CLI prediction entrypoint
└─ tests/
   ├─ test_data.py
   ├─ test_features.py
   └─ test_models.py
```

## Project Workflow

1. **Data Loading & Cleaning**  
   - Handle missing values and incorrect data types  
   - Normalize/encode categorical variables  

2. **Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)**  
   - Visualize price trends based on car features  
   - Identify correlations between predictors and price  

3. **Feature Engineering**  
   - Create new variables (e.g., car age)  
   - Encode categorical variables (One-Hot Encoding / Label Encoding)  

4. **Modeling**  
   - Train baseline regression models (Linear, Ridge, Lasso)  
   - Experiment with tree-based models (Random Forest, XGBoost, LightGBM)  
   - Hyperparameter tuning for best performance  

5. **Evaluation**  
   - Metrics: R², MAE, RMSE  
   - Compare models and select the most accurate one  

## Tools & Libraries

- Python 3.x
- Pandas, NumPy
- Matplotlib, Seaborn
- Scikit-learn
- XGBoost, LightGBM (optional)
- Jupyter Notebook

## Results

The final model provides a strong predictive capability for used car prices, making it useful for dealers, buyers, and sellers to estimate fair market value.

## How to Run

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/InnerWerks/Car-Price-Prediction-Project.git

# Navigate into the project directory
cd car-price-prediction

# Initialize a virtual environment
make venv

# Configure Kaggle credentials
cp .env.example .env   # then edit .env and set KAGGLE_USERNAME and KAGGLE_KEY

# Download the dataset into data/raw/
make download       # uses configs/dataset.yaml kaggle.dataset

# Prepare directories and build datasets (interim + processed)
make prepare        # ensures data/ and models/ folders exist
make data           # load -> split -> preprocess -> persist

# Train the model and evaluate it
make train          # train model and save artifacts/metrics
make evaluate       # evaluate saved model and generate reports

# Start notebooks
make notebooks
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

Commit message:

Add predict command and functionality for batch predictions in CLI and Makefile

README.md, after:

# Car Price Prediction

Predict the selling price of used cars using regression models. This project explores a public Kaggle dataset containing features such as car brand, year, mileage, fuel type, transmission type, and more. The goal is to build an accurate predictive model that helps estimate fair market value.

## Dataset

**Source:** [Car Price Prediction Dataset - Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/bhavikjikadara/car-price-prediction-dataset)  
Contains various attributes:
- Car_Name
- Year
- Selling_Price
- Present_Price
- Kms_Driven
- Fuel_Type
- Transmission
- Owner

## Codebase Structure

```
Car-Price-Prediction-Project/
├─ README.md
├─ .gitignore
├─ .env.example
├─ requirements.txt        # core deps shared across projects
├─ Makefile                # convenience targets (see below)
├─ configs/
│  ├─ dataset.yaml         # paths, target, splits, modality
│  ├─ model.yaml           # model family & hyperparams
│  ├─ train.yaml           # epochs, batch_size, class_weights, seed
│  └─ eval.yaml            # metrics to compute/report
├─ data/
│  ├─ raw/                 # original data (not tracked by git)
│  ├─ interim/             # cleaned/standardized (e.g., tokenized text)
│  └─ processed/           # train/val/test ready for modeling
├─ models/
│  ├─ artifacts/           # .joblib / .pt / .h5 files
│  ├─ metrics/             # JSON/CSV metric logs per run
│  └─ version.txt          # pointer to "best" model
├─ notebooks/
│  ├─ 01_eda.ipynb
│  ├─ 02_baseline.ipynb
│  └─ 03_experiments.ipynb
├─ reports/
│  ├─ figures/             # plots saved by EDA/eval
│  └─ model_card.md        # short, human-readable summary
├─ scripts/
│  ├─ download_data.sh     # optional data fetcher
│  ├─ run_train.sh
│  └─ run_eval.sh
├─ src/
│  ├─ __init__.py
│  ├─ cli.py               # `python -m src.cli <cmd> --config ...`
│  ├─ utils/
│  │  ├─ io.py             # load/save, path helpers
│  │  ├─ logging.py        # run id, console/file logs
│  │  └─ metrics.py        # RMSE/MAE/ROC AUC/F1, etc.
│  ├─ data/
│  │  ├─ load.py           # reads raw -> dataframe/paths
│  │  ├─ split.py          # stratified/temporal splits
│  │  └─ preprocess.py     # dispatches by modality
│  ├─ features/
│  │  └─ tabular.py        # scaling, OHE/target enc, imputation
│  ├─ models/
│  │  └─ tabular.py        # sklearn pipelines (LR/RF/XGB/LGBM)
│  ├─ training/
│  │  ├─ train.py          # fit loop; saves model+metrics
│  │  └─ evaluate.py       # loads model; computes metrics & plots
│  └─ inference/
│     └─ predict.py        # batch/CLI prediction entrypoint
└─ tests/
   ├─ test_data.py
   ├─ test_features.py
   └─ test_models.py
```

## Project Workflow

1. **Data Loading & Cleaning**  
   - Handle missing values and incorrect data types  
   - Normalize/encode categorical variables  

2. **Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)**  
   - Visualize price trends based on car features  
   - Identify correlations between predictors and price  

3. **Feature Engineering**  
   - Create new variables (e.g., car age)  
   - Encode categorical variables (One-Hot Encoding / Label Encoding)  

4. **Modeling**  
   - Train baseline regression models (Linear, Ridge, Lasso)  
   - Experiment with tree-based models (Random Forest, XGBoost, LightGBM)  
   - Hyperparameter tuning for best performance  

5. **Evaluation**  
   - Metrics: R², MAE, RMSE  
   - Compare models and select the most accurate one  

## Tools & Libraries

- Python 3.x
- Pandas, NumPy
- Matplotlib, Seaborn
- Scikit-learn
- XGBoost, LightGBM (optional)
- Jupyter Notebook

## Results

The final model provides a strong predictive capability for used car prices, making it useful for dealers, buyers, and sellers to estimate fair market value.

## How to Run

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/InnerWerks/Car-Price-Prediction-Project.git

# Navigate into the project directory
cd car-price-prediction

# Initialize a virtual environment
make venv

# Configure Kaggle credentials
cp .env.example .env   # then edit .env and set KAGGLE_USERNAME and KAGGLE_KEY

# Download the dataset into data/raw/
make download       # uses configs/dataset.yaml kaggle.dataset

# Prepare directories and build datasets (interim + processed)
make prepare        # ensures data/ and models/ folders exist
make data           # load -> split -> preprocess -> persist

# Train the model and evaluate it
make train          # train model and save artifacts/metrics
make evaluate       # evaluate saved model and generate reports

# Run batch predictions on a new data
make predict INPUT=path/to/input.csv

# Start notebooks
make notebooks
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.
